The Great House and the Well. The Great House, known as T. Mowre in Welsh, is an
Elizabethan manor house. It's a grade two listed building that was built around
1569. It's sometimes known as the Earl of Leicester's house. Sir Robert Sidney, who
became Earl of Leicester in 1618, took ownership of the Coitie estate on his
marriage in 1584. And it is possible that he and his wife lived in the house for a
year until he was elected Member of Parliament for Glamorganshire in 1585.
But following his election they are known to have lived mainly in London. The
assumption that this house was part of the Coitie estate has therefore not been
proven. When the Coitie estate was bought by Samuel Edwin in 1718, T. Mowre, or the
Great House, was not included in the sale. Hence the romantic idea that the house
once belonged to the Earl of Leicester is no more than that, at least until
someone proves otherwise. During the winter the house was said to use heat
from wintering cattle in an abutting barn as a kind of central heating. This
is one of the stories often told to diners at the Great House, which is now a
hotel and restaurant. As you continue the trail past the Great House and then
behind it, you'll reach Well Street. Until 1928 there was no mains water
available in the village. The well situated on this street was the main
source of water to the villagers. In times of drought, it is said, each household was
permitted just two gallons of water per day.